Title: Reading roundup
Date: 2016-02-26 10:30:00
Slug: reading-roundup-2016-02-26
Author: Daniel S. Standage
Category: roundup
Tags: reproducibility; open; python; funding; homebrew
Summary: Roundup of links from the last week's worth of interesting reads.

## [This commentary I missed previously on the "research parasites" fiasco](http://genome.fieldofscience.com/2016/01/nejm-editorial-calls-data-scientists.html)

> Disproving a claim using the same data is what reproducibility is all about, and this is one of the most important reasons that data needs to be shared.
> After all, if someone has distorted their data in order to reach a conclusion that isn't really justified, we need someone else–someone not invested in proving the same result–to re-analyze the data using independent methods.
> This is how science corrects itself.

## [This post on open educational resources (OER)](http://opencontent.org/blog/archives/4443)

> Anderson goes on to critique OER:
>> “A big issue for the open source movement has been its sustainability.
>> And that’s one of the reasons you’re seeing a lot of legislation about it because they are looking basically to the taxpayer,” he said.
>
> I hope to hear more of this criticism of OER from publishers and AAP in the future. Why?
> The US PIRG’s recent report [Covering the Cost](http://www.uspirg.org/reports/usp/covering-cost) estimates that each year approximately $3B – that’s $3,000,000,000US – of financial aid dollars are spent by undergraduates on textbooks and other proprietary educational materials.
> In other words, under the existing commercial textbook model students are simply valves through which taxpayer dollars flow to publishers.
I would love the opportunity to get this number in front of more people.

## [This HowTo on Python string formatting](https://pyformat.info/)

> Python has had awesome string formatters for many years but the documentation on them is far too theoretic and technical.
> With this site we try to show you the most common use-cases covered by the old and new style string formatting API with practical examples.

## [This post suggesting we fund science by lottery](http://simplystatistics.org/2016/02/16/when-it-comes-to-science-its-the-economy-stupid/)

> I’m very confident in a peer review to detect the difference between psuedo-science and real science, or complete hype and realistic improvement.
> But I’m much less confident in the ability of peer review to accurately distinguish “important” from “not important” research.
> So I think we should consider seriously the lottery for these grants.
>
> Each year all eligible scientists who meet some minimum entry requirements submit proposals for what they’d like to do scientifically.
> Each year those proposals are reviewed to make sure they meet the very minimum bar (are they scientific? do they have relevant training at all?).
> Among all the (very large) class of people who pass that bar we hold a lottery.
> We take the number of research dollars and divide it up to give the maximum number of these grants possible.
> These grants might be pretty small - just enough to fund the person’s salary and maybe one or two students/postdocs.
> To make this works for labs that required equipment there would have to be cooperative arrangements between multiple independent indviduals to fund/sustain equipment they needed.
> Renewal of these grants would happen as long as you were posting your code/data online, you were meeting peer review requirements, and responding to inquires about your work.

## These posts on Sci-Hub and open access to research

- [This post](http://blog.comicsgrid.com/2016/02/sci-hub-not-open-access/) claiming that Sci-Hub has brought much-needed attention to an important issue, but that it is not a long-term solution.
- [This response](https://engineuring.wordpress.com/2016/02/24/why-sci-hub-is-the-true-solution-for-open-access-reply-to-criticism/) to the original post, from the Sci-Hub founder, which comes across as pretty reactionary and defensive.
- [This post](http://bjoern.brembs.net/2016/02/sci-hub-as-necessary-effective-civil-disobedience/) which doesn't (ostensibly) take any sides on the debate, but describes Sci-Hub as necessary civil disobedience and (in my opinion) highlights the good from both previous arguments.

## These threads on compiling GCC with OpenMP support on OS X.

I was having trouble installing CD-HIT this week with Homebrew.
These two StackOverflow threads ([here](http://stackoverflow.com/a/29109926/459780) and [here](http://stackoverflow.com/a/23490170/459780)) led me to the solution.

```bash
brew reinstall gcc --without-multilib
brew install --build-from-source cd-hit
```
