Title: That darn cache! Configuring the SRA Toolkit
Date: 2016-05-18
Author: Daniel S. Standage
Category: blog
Tags: sra; ngs

Last night I started a batch job on our group's cluster to download and process 9 Illumina libraries from the [NCBI SRA](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra).
In the past, I have almost always downloaded such data via direct links to `.sra` files on the SRA FTP site, and then converted these files to Fastq format using the `fastq-dump` command from the [SRA Toolkit](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?view=software).
However, for a while I've been aware that the `fastq-dump` command is capable of downloading data (by accession) directly from NCBI.
So last night, I took advantage of this convenience function.

This morning, I woke up to a barrage of warnings on the cluster saying that their was not disk space left.
*Impossible*, I thought, *there are terabytes of free space on the scratch mount.*
It was not the scratch partition that had filled up though, it was the `$HOME` partition.
I'm lucky I was even able to log on to the machine.
What the heck is going on?!?!

It turns out that by default, `fastq-dump` doesn't actually stream `.sra` files from the FTP site.
Instead, it downloads intermediate cache files, which by default are stored in `~/ncbi/sra/`.
This is a huge issue for several reasons.
First of all, this behavior is not *at all* obvious to a new user.
Sure, there may be use cases where this behavior is very useful, but it seems much more appropriate as an *opt-in* feature than a default.
Secondly, this is bound to create problems for cluster/HPC users all over the place that have very limited storage in their `$HOME` directories.

Fortunately, the SRA Toolkit allows you to configure this behavior.
The [officially-sanctioned approach](https://github.com/ncbi/sra-tools/wiki/Toolkit-Configuration) is to fire up a config program, which will allow you to disable caching behavior and/or remote network access of any kind.
The unofficial unsanctioned approach would be to make the config file yourself with a couple of shell commands.

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.ncbi
echo '/repository/user/main/public/root = "/scratch/standage/sra-cache"' > ~/.ncbi/user-settings.mkfg
# Uncomment the next command if you want to disable network access altogether
# echo '/repository/user/cache-disabled = "true"' > ~/.ncbi/user-settings.mkfg
```
