Title: PEP8 and the Atom editor
Date: 2016-01-19
Author: Daniel S. Standage
Category: blog
Tags: programming

I tried out the [Atom text editor](https://atom.io/) very soon after it came out.
For some reason--whether a half-hearted attempt on my part, or the fact that Atom was an unrefined beta--I didn't love it.
After only a day or two, I reverted to the Komodo Edit editor I had been comfortable with for several years.

Recently, I heard a colleague describe Atom as a "Markdown editor".
I was surprised, since my impression is that Atom was developed as a general purpose editor.
But after my colleague showed me Atom's real-time Markdown render/preview feature, I figured I might give Atom a try again.

I'm enjoying Atom much better this time around.
After working with it for a few days doing some basic programming (Python) and writing (Markdown) I had no complaints.
It was only when I started revisiting some of my C code that I started having problems.

Not serious problems by any means: maybe *annoyances* is a better word.
Anyway, I follow PEP8 for the most part when I write Python code, so I had my wrap guide set to 79 characters.
This became awkward when I am working on C code, where I have long used 80 characters as the limit.
I was not enthusiastic about switching the wrap guide every time I changed langauges, which seemed to be the only alternative to just switching the whole thing off.

Since Atom is touted as the ultimate hackable and configurable editor, I figured I would see if the wrap guide is something I can configure on a per-language basis.
Surely enough, a bit of Google searching uncovered [the secret](https://atom.io/packages/wrap-guide).
The `preferredLineLength` attribute under `editor` controls where the wrap guide is displayed.
I set the default (under `*`) to 80, and then I created another Python-specific configuration with `".source.py"`, with `preferredLineLength` set to 79.

Here is my Atom configuration file, stored at `~/.atom/config.cson`.

```
"*":
  core:
    disabledPackages: [
      "spell-check"
    ]
    projectHome: "/Users/standage/Software"
  editor:
    fontFamily: "Consolas"
    invisibles: {}
    preferredLineLength: 80
    showIndentGuide: true
    tabLength: 4
  welcome:
    showOnStartup: false

".source.py":
  "editor:":
    preferredLineLength: 79
```

That's it!
